Welcome back to this lecture on morphological operators morphological operators or sets of kernels that
can achieve a variety of effects such as reducing noise we've already seen kernels that can achieve
effects such as blurring and smoothing these morphological operators are going to expand on that.
In fact certain operators are very good at reducing blackpoint on a white background and vice versa.
Other types of operators can also achieve an erosion and the dilation effect that can add or erode from
an existing image this effect is actually most easily seen on text data.
So what we will be doing is we're going to practice various morphological operators on some simple white
text on a black background.
Let's get started.
Welcome back.
I'm going to copy and paste a few functions from our morphological operators notebook.
The first function is a function that loads the image and before we actually load up these functions
when I'm going to there's also copy and paste all imports that we usually do.
So import to them and lib.
Copy and paste these imports from the morphological operators notebook.
I'm just going to copy and paste this load image function.
And what this does is it loads up 600 by 600 0 so that's just a black image.
And then we write some white fonts on it that just says A B C D and then what else want to do is display
the image so that it's a little larger.
I will copy and paste the display image function as well.
We've already seen this function quite a few times.
And then let's go ahead and load up the image and display it.
So I will say image is equal to load image and then we will display the image with display image.
And when you run that you should see the result of this kind of these boloney like letters of A B C
D E.
OK.
So we're going to learn about a couple of morphological operators.
Essentially they're just specialized kernels to achieve a specific effect.
So the first thing we're going to look at is erosion and erosion as a morphological operator essentially
erodes away boundaries of foreground objects.
So here we can see that the letters looked to be in the foreground where the black is a general background.
And we're going to try to do is with this kernel detect these edges between our foreground text and
the background in black or move begin to erode away that boundary.
The kernel we're going to create is kernel's equal to N.P. ones and we'll create a five by five kernel
and we'll also specify the data type to be integers and P you I antedate that integer.
So if you take a look at that kernel it's just a bunch of integer ones.
Ok then the next thing to do is call C-v to dot erode and then you pass in the image and you pass in
this kernel and you can play around with the actual size of the kernel and then the last primary can
pass in iterations.
Which simply means how many passes you want to do.
So we're going to say first iterations equals to 1 so iteration is equal to one essentially doing one
pass and we'll call this result.
We'll run that and let's display that actual result we'll say display image results.
And here we can see the actual letters.
Do we actually see any erosion here.
Well if we take a look at the original image you'll notice that the connection between A and B is quite
strong.
And here it begins to weaken.
Let's actually see an extreme version of this.
We're going to load the image again.
So let's reload this image here.
So I ran that cell again so I can display the image and same kernel are going to be using this five
by five of all integer ones.
Except now I'm going to do five iterations so this should be a pretty extreme effect and maybe I don't
want it that extreme.
Let's do four iterations just in case we lose the letters off at 5 but I'm going to display the image
as a result.
And you can see here that now it definitely eroded away quite a bit from the foreground text.
So that's how you can perform erosion which is a morphological operator.
Again you just say C-v to erode pasand the image pasan a kernel of your choosing of ones here you can
play around the different sizes seven by seven or nine by nine.
But typically the thing you're really going to be editing is this iterations if you want more erosion
you just do more iterations.
OK then the next effect we're going to learn is opening opening is erosion followed by dilation.
So dilation is essentially the opposite of erosion you end up adding more to that foreground.
But what's useful about opening is it can actually be helpful in removing background noise.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to create some white noise and put it onto our original image.
So let's load up the image again.
Essentially that white on black text and then I'm going to create some white noise using them Pye's
ran capabilities we'll see any random Rand I.A. and we'll say the low is zero and just the high goes
up to that including two.
So this is going to give me ones and zeros and I want the size to be equal to 600 by 600.
The shape of our original image which means if I actually take a look at white noise it's an array of
600 by 600 points of either zeros or ones which in our case we're dealing with just zeros and ones here.
It's all binary then.
This is essentially just a bunch of noise.
So if I actually display this image if I say display image white noise it's just a bunch of noise so
random spots of black random spots of white.
We're going to do now is actually end up putting in this white noise into our original text image the
way we're going to do that is if we actually take a look at our original image.
So right now our image we check out the max value
it ends up being 255.
So we need to convert this to be zeros and 255.
So what we will do now is say white noise is equal to white noise times 255.
So not just going to be a bunch of zeros and 255 points so zeros and 255.
That way it's going to be at the same scale of our original image.
So we still have a bunch of black and white because still display this image display image of that white
noise.
And there you have it it's still a bunch of noise there.
Now we're going to do is we're going to say noise.
Image is equal to white noise.
Plus our original image and if we say display image and pass in the noise image now you'll notice that
it's become a lot noisier.
So we just essentially added in all those values of 0 and 255.
So some points got some noise some points didn't.
But here we can see that's kind of a mess.
So this is our noise image.
We just ended up adding all this noise to the original text we had up here.
Now we can use opening which is a technique as a morphological operator to actually get rid of this
noise.
So if you have a situation that looks something like this where you have kind of a dark background and
the light foreground but ends up being very noisy specifically black and white noise in particular.
So this works really well in grayscale images that you can use this morphological operator and this
is called opening.
We're going to say C-v to what we call morphology X you pasand the noise image.
And you'll say C-v to morf underscore open and then you'll pass in that same kernel we used earlier
run that and then display the image
and you'll notice right away that we were able to essentially clear out a lot of the noise without too
much distortion of the original text.
If we actually see the original image if I say display image and show the original one you will notice
that it wasn't a perfect rendition.
So here's the image that's the original one.
Look at the BE THERE.
Look at these two kind of holes in the B.
And if you look at up here you can see there's a little bit of noise and that has to do with the way
that the opening wasn't able to perfectly clean up these letters.
You could see the easel has kind of extensions off its original boundary compared to the flat image
here but it was able to do a really good job considering just how much noise there was in this noise
image.
OK.
So that's known as opening.
And again all opening really is just erosion followed by dilation.
So we've already seen how erosion works and dilation essentially just expands on the image.
So when it come back down here.
So that's known as opening and again opening is really useful for getting rid of noise in that fashion.
So it's useful for removing background noise.
Now in some cases you're actually going to have foreground noise and we're going to now create an image
that has foreground noise.
I will reload the image again.
So we start fresh and this time is of white noise I'm going to create some black noise.
And I will say that ran them.
Rand I.A. the low is going to be equal to zero.
The high is going to be equal to two right.
That in what's high will be called to and then size is equal to 600 by 600.
And the reason we say high is equal to two here.
That's the upper limit.
It doesn't actually include the upper limit and you can check that by saying shift tab.
The upper limit high is exclusive not inclusive like the little one.
So is going to end up being or Black Noise.
And if we take a look at it right now.
It essentially looks as the white noise at least what we started with but all we're going to do now
is say Black Noise is equal to Black Noise times negative 255.
And if I take a look at the results of that notice now I have zeros and minus two fives.
So that's not going to affect the black but it will affect the foreground in white.
It'll make some of this back down to black.
So we're going to do here is the following.
We're going to say a black noise image is equal to image.
Plus Black Noise.
So then if we actually display this and actually we're not quite done yet.
If we show the image black noise image that is right now it's a bunch of zeros and then negative 255.
So what we're going to do is anywhere it equals negative 255.
We're just going to bring that back up to zero because it doesn't really make sense for value.
Everything should be either 0 or 255.
So we can simply do this with some indexing will say Black Noise image where Black Noise image is equals
negative 255.
So that equal to zero.
And now if I take a look at the Black Noise image specifically the minimum of value it's now been turned
to zero.
So he took all these negative 250 fives and brought him back up to zero because zero should be the smallest
value we have when displaying a black and white image.
And essentially what this black noise did is going to randomly subtract 255 from every single pixel
in the original image.
Now for the black ones which are zero that means they go to negative 255 for the white ones.
That means they go down to zero.
So then we're just taking everything that went down to negative to 5:5 the black foreground and bringing
it back up to zero it's original value.
So it's actually display the results of that the split image role say Black Noise image and notice.
Now what we have is essentially just a bunch of black points in the foreground and we can use closing
to actually attempt to clean this up.
So previously we had a bunch of noise in the background.
Now we have a bunch of noise solely in the foreground and closing is a good way of getting rid of the
sort of noise we'll say closing is equal to CB2 and it's essentially almost the same call morphology
X just tab autocomplete that you passen your noisy image that has a bunch of noise in the foreground
and then we'll say CB2 Morf underscore close and then you can pass in the same kernel and you can experiment
with different kernel sizes some maybe a little noisier than others and let's display the results of
that.
Well to say the split image show the results and there it is.
Notice again it's definitely not perfect.
Now you can see there's some lines that are much stronger the connection between a and b is actually
thicker now.
And now there's even kind of a thin white line between B and C..
However given how much there was to work with here how much noise there was it's actually doing a pretty
darn good job.
And you can experiment with the kernel size in case you want to try to see a kernel that's better.
But in general this is the way you can't get rid of foreground noise.
Morf close essentially the opposite of morphological opening.
OK.
Now lesing I want to discuss is the morphological gradient and the morphological gradient just takes
the difference between dilation and erosion of an image let's Reesa our image.
Well say load image and all we're going to do here is display the original image so we can see what
it looks like.
So here is the original image.
We know that if we were to perform erosion it would begin to get read between the background and the
foreground edge.
If I were to perform dilation it would actually end up adding more Mickey D's letters even more but
really the morphological gradient will take the difference between those two.
And what happens is especially with text it becomes really clear you essentially just grab the edge
of the foreground next to the background.
And this kind of a method of edge detection.
So we'll see more sophisticated methods of action later on in a couple of sessions for them of course.
But this one is pretty simple we just say gradients and then say CB2 again calling morphology X say
image CB2.
And this time the Morfe call you going to do is Morf gradients and pass in the same kernel and this
will be a pretty cool result.
We'll say the display image gradients run that.
And there you have it.
This is the difference between erosion and dilation essentially just the edges of this text.
So you can do this as kind of a crude form of edge detection and that's it for all the morphological
operators that we're going to cover in this lecture.
We'll see them come time to time especially when we need to get rid of noise.
And then we can even add them in with things like median blurbed to also get help to also help get rid
of noise in certain images or maybe help with edge detection but that's all you need to know.
The fact that you can.
Don't worry too much about adding noise to images we really won't be doing that we should understand
though is that there's different calls you can make and those calls are essentially in this format.
If we come back down here there are morphology X you pass in the image and then you do a CV to call
with a more underscore and it's either going to be open close or a gradient the pinning on what you're
actually trying to achieve and then you pass the kernel as well and you can play around with that kernel
size OK.
So that's it for this lecture.
We'll see you at the next one where we dive in deeper into gradients.